feat(doc): publish doc to astarte sdk-doc repo (#406)
astarte-platform/astarte-device-sdk-rust: docs/get-started.md

<!--
Copyright 2025 SECO Mind Srl

SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-->

# Get started with Rust

Follow this guide to get started with the Astarte device SDK for the Rust programming language. We
will guide you through setting up a very basic Rust application creating a device, connecting it to
a local Astarte instance and transmitting some data.

## Before you begin

### Local Astarte instance

This get started will focus on creating a device and connecting it to an Astarte instance. If you
don't have access to an Astarte instance you can easily set up one following our
[Astarte quick instance guide](https://docs.astarte-platform.org/device-sdks/common/astarte_quick_instance.html).

> From here on we will assume you have access to an Astarte instance, remote or on a host machine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From here on we will assume you have access to an Astarte instance, remote or on a local machine
```

connected to the same LAN where your device will be connected. Furthermore, we will assume you have
access to the Astarte dashboard for a realm. The next steps will install the required interfaces and
register a new device on Astarte using the dashboard. The same operations could be performed using
`astartectl` and the access token generated in the Astarte quick instance guide.

### Installing the required interfaces

The interfaces that our device will use must first be installed within the Astarte instance. In this
guide we will show how to stream individual and aggregated data as well as how to set and unset
properties. As a consequence we will need three separated interfaces, one for each data type.

The following is the definition of the individually aggregated interface:

> 

Reviewer: We could also provide them in the doc or asset folder of the repo through a link/permalink

```json
{
  "interface_name": "org.astarte-platform.rust.get-started.Individual",
  "version_major": 0,
  "version_minor": 1,
  "type": "datastream",
  "ownership": "device",
  "description": "Individual interface for the get-started of the Astarte device SDK for the Rust programming language.",
  "mappings": [
    {
      "endpoint": "/double_endpoint",
      "type": "double",
      "explicit_timestamp": false
    }
  ]
}
```

> Next is the definition of the aggregated interface:

Reviewer 2: Debatable but calling in an object aggregated interface or object interface could be better

### Registering the device

Devices should be pre-registered to Astarte before their first connection. With the Astarte device
SDK for Rust this can be achieved in two ways:

- By registering the device on Astarte manually, obtaining a credentials secret and transferring it
  on the device.
- By using the included registration utilities provided by the SDK. Those utilities can make use of
  a registration JWT issued by Astarte and register the device automatically before the first
  connection.

To keep this guide as simple as possible we will use the first method, as a device can be registered
using the Astarte dashboard with a couple of clicks.

To install a new device start by opening the dashboard and navigate to the devices tab. Click on
register a new device, there you can input your own device ID or generate a random one. For example
you could use the device ID `2TBn-jNESuuHamE2Zo1anA`. Click on register device, this will register
the device and give you a credentials secret. The credentials secret will be used by the device to
authenticate itself with Astarte. Copy it somewhere safe as it will be used in the next steps.

## Creating a Rust project

> First, make sure you have Rust v1.78.0 or later installed, since it is the MSRV of the Astarte

Reviewer 3: On release-0.9 branch we have v.1.72.0 version. Please update it, or alternatively, we can say `make sure you have Rust MSRV of the Astarte or later installed`, so we don't have to keep the Rust version updated here as well.
```suggestion
First, make sure you have Rust v1.72.0 or later installed, since it is the MSRV of the Astarte
```

Author: yes, maybe it's better to avoid inserting the specific version

Reviewer: We could just suggest using `stable` or an "up-to-date Rust tool chain", with our prefered installation method using `rustup`

device Rust SDK. Then, create a new project:

```bash
cargo new astarte-rust-project
```

Then, we need to add the following dependencies in the Cargo.toml file:

- `astarte-device-sdk`, to properly use the Astarte SDK
- `tokio`, a runtime for writing asynchronous applications

> - `serde` and `serde_json`, for serializing and deserializing Rust data structures. It could be
>   useful in case you want to retrieve some device configuration stored in a file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `serde` and `serde_json`, for serializing and deserializing Rust data structures. They are useful since we want to retrieve some device configuration stored in a json file.
```

We also suggest you to add the following dependencies

- `tracing` and `env_logger`, for a better logging experience

> Thus, the content of the Cargo.toml file will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run the following cargo add command:

```sh
cargo add astarte-device-sdk --features=derive
cargo add tokio --features=full
cargo add serde serde-json --features=serde/derive
cargo add tracing tracing-subscriber
cargo add eyre
```

Thus, the content of the Cargo.toml file will:
```

The github comment is broken :^(

Reviewer: This will use the latest available version of the libraries

```toml
[package]
name = "astarte-rust-project"
version = "0.1.0"
edition = "2024"

[dependencies]
astarte-device-sdk = { version = "0.9.2", features = ["derive"] }
tokio = { version = "1.42.0", features = ["signal"] }
serde = { version = "1.0.217", features = ["derive"] }
tracing = "0.1.41"
env_logger = "0.11.5"

> serde_json = "1.0.135"

Author: Yes i think it's better to remove it

```

To easily load the Astarte configuration information, such as the realm name, the astarte instance
endpoint, the device id and the pairing url, you could set some environment variables or store them
in a `config.json` file, like the following:

```json
{
  "realm": "Realm name",
  "device_id": "Device ID",
  "credentials_secret": "Credentials secret",
  "pairing_url": "Pairing URL"
}
```

We previously added three interfaces to our Astarte instance. We also need to save the three
interfaces in JSON files, for instance in a `interfaces` folder in your working directory. These
will be retrieved, parsed and then used during the device connection

## Instantiating and connecting a device

Finally, we can start with the source code of our device application. We will first create a new
device using the device ID and credentials secret we obtained in the previous steps.

```no_run
use std::time::{Duration, SystemTime};

use astarte_device_sdk::{
    builder::DeviceBuilder, client::RecvError, prelude::*, store::memory::MemoryStore,
    transport::mqtt::MqttConfig,
};
use serde::Deserialize;
use tokio::task::JoinSet;
use tracing::{error, info};

> type DynError = Box<dyn std::error::Error + Send + Sync + 'static>;
> 
> /// structure used to deserialize the content of the config.json file containing the
> /// astarte device connection information
> #[derive(Deserialize)]
> struct Config {
>     realm: String,
>     device_id: String,
>     credentials_secret: String,
>     pairing_url: String,
> }
> 
> #[tokio::main]
> async fn main() -> Result<(), DynError> {
>     env_logger::init();
>     let now = SystemTime::now();

Reviewer: ```suggestion

/// structure used to deserialize the content of the config.json file containing the
/// astarte device connection information
#[derive(Deserialize)]
struct Config {
    realm: String,
    device_id: String,
    credentials_secret: String,
    pairing_url: String,
}

#[tokio::main]
async fn main() -> eyre::Result<()> {
    tracing_subscriber::fmt::init();
    let now = SystemTime::now();
```

    // Load the device configuration
    let file = std::fs::read_to_string("configuration.json")?;
    let cfg: Config = serde_json::from_str(&file)?;

    let mut mqtt_config = MqttConfig::with_credential_secret(
        &cfg.realm,
        &cfg.device_id,
        &cfg.credentials_secret,
        &cfg.pairing_url,
    );
    mqtt_config.ignore_ssl_errors();

    let (client, connection) = DeviceBuilder::new()
        .store(MemoryStore::new())
        .interface_directory("interfaces")?
        .connect(mqtt_config)
        .await?
        .build()
        .await;

    info!("Connection to Astarte established.");

    Ok(())
}
```

> ## Polling device events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Receiving device events
```

After device initialization and connection, the device will need to be polled regularly to ensure
the processing of MQTT messages.

To this extent, we can spawn a tokio task (the equivalent of an OS thread but managed by the Tokio
runtime) to poll connection messages. Ideally, two separate tasks should be used for both polling
and transmission.

```no_run
// ... imports, structs definition ...

> # use std::time::{Duration, SystemTime};

Author: it's a notation used to hide portions of code in the documentation which will still be used when compiling the code. It is useful to avoid cargo warning when checking the documentation.
Look [here](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustdoc/write-documentation/documentation-tests.html#hiding-portions-of-the-example) for more details
